Question 4 – File Access and I/O Investigation

Objective

To investigate file access, file descriptors, input/output redirection, and resource limits in Linux/macOS using standard system utilities.

Open Files Identified

Command Used:
lsof | head

Observation:
The command displayed files currently opened by running processes. Several system files associated with the loginwindow process were listed. This confirms that Linux/macOS keeps track of all files being accessed by active processes.

File Descriptor Observations

Command Used:
lsof -p $$

Observation:
The current shell process (zsh) showed the following file descriptors:

0u – Standard Input (stdin)

1u – Standard Output (stdout)

2u – Standard Error (stderr)

10u – Additional terminal file descriptor

These descriptors are connected to /dev/ttys000, indicating that the shell receives input and sends output through the terminal device.

Output Redirection

Command Used:
echo "Hello Linux" > output.txt
cat output.txt

Output:
Hello Linux

Observation:
The > operator redirected standard output to the file output.txt. The file was successfully created and stored the command output.

Error Redirection

Command Used:
ls nonexistentfile 2> error.txt
cat error.txt

Output:
ls: nonexistentfile: No such file or directory

Observation:
The 2> operator redirected the error message generated by the ls command into error.txt instead of displaying it directly on the terminal.

Resource Limits Observed

Command Used:
ulimit -a

Key Results:

CPU Time: unlimited

File Size: unlimited

Data Segment Size: unlimited

Stack Size: 8176 KB

Core File Size: 0

Address Space: unlimited

Processes: 1333

File Descriptors: 256

Observation:
These limits define the maximum resources available to the current shell and its child processes. They help prevent excessive resource consumption.

How Linux Manages File I/O

Linux uses file descriptors to manage all input and output operations. Every process receives standard input, standard output, and standard error descriptors. Files, devices, terminals, and network sockets are all accessed through file descriptors. Redirection operators allow output and errors to be written to files instead of the terminal. The operating system controls resource usage through configurable limits.

Conclusion

The investigation demonstrated how Linux/macOS tracks open files, manages file descriptors, performs output and error redirection, and enforces resource limits. File descriptors provide a unified mechanism for handling I/O operations, while redirection enables flexible control of command output and error streams.
